---
title: Multilingualism as a pedagogic resource in classroom
---


The article tries to explore the debate about the usefulness of multilingualism as a resource in classroom. From my viewpoint, multilingualism is viewed as an obstacle for classroom transaction as it might create hurdles for the instructor to transact in a common language that is understandable by all the students or it might be difficult to understand each other’s views since teaching in different languages might be a challenge for both the students and the teacher. According to Angihotri (1995), the languages spoken by children and communities at home are neglected at school. “Diverse languages are seen as obstacles and sources of interference in the learning of target language.”(pp.3) Different subjects taught at school are predominantly associated with a particular language and therefore, schools develop negative stereotypes about languages of socially disadvantaged. Since language is at the center of all educational activity, But there are many reasons in support of multilingualism being as a useful pedagogic resource in the classroom. Before understanding the reasons, one needs to understand the concepts of ‘multilingualism’ and ‘pedagogical resource’. Multilingualism can be defined in accordance to various perspectives such as linguistics, sociology, language policies, education, etc. The basic definition of multilingualism relates to the ability of a speaker to be able to speak and understand more than one language. However, multilingualism in education focusses on the development and revitalisation of languages. Mohanty, Panda, Phillipson & Skutnabb-Kangas (2009) describe multilingual education (MLE) as “the use of two or more languages (including Sign languages) as media of instruction in subjects other than the languages themselves  and with (high levels of) multilingualism and, preferably, multiliteracy, as a goal at the end of formal schooling”(pp. xvii). The term ‘pedagogical’ relates to teaching. So, ‘pedagogical resource’ would mean the usage/induction of something as a tool by the teachers for the concepts being taught. Therefore, the following four themes tries to explore why multilingualism can be a useful pedagogic resource in a classrooms. The article is then concluded by citing how multilingualism can be a pedagogic resource.


**Facilitates inclusion and diversity–** Multilingualism can be useful in classroom as it will enhances the linguistic diversity. Every children in a classroom has a different sociological and cultural background and thus have varied real world experiences and knowledge. This brings diversity and variations of culture (Jayaram,2017,pp.59). Each child must be knowing his/her communities’ mother tongue. The multilingualism education provides access to linguistic, pedagogical and psychological development as opposed to submersion education in which a child is forced to study in a dominant language. Using this and their knowledge around it, reduces harmful consequences socially, psychologically, economically and poltically. (Kangas,2009, pp.4). Therefore, multilingualism would contribute towards enhancing and maintaining linguistic diversity. Further, since multilingual education focusses on the indigeneous and tribal people, the linguistic diversity can then be related to biodiversity because of the management of world’s most megadiversity by the Indigenous/tribal peoples. According to Kangas (2009), “Much of the detailed knowledge of how to maintain biodiversity is encoded in their languages.” (pp.5). Agnihotri(1995) also points out that, “different languages perform different functions and are related to maintenance of multiple identities.” (pp.5).
A multilingual classroom would expose students to different other languages thus facilitating diversity. “A multilingual classroom was a reflection of a larger multilingual context, where the children interacted and gained exposure to different languages” (Nag, 2019, pp.31).


**Enhances Competence**- There is a strong correlation between cognitive flexibility and multilingual competence. A multilingual classroom provides a space to use many languages in several domains of learning (Agnihotri, 2009, pp.7).  A child’s academic achievement can increase. 


**Use mother-tongue based MLE facilitating learning of other languages** – The children are able to express themselves, will move beyond their simple social communication and engage in deep intelligent mental activities. Besides BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skill), their CALP(Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency Skill) will also increase. According to Mohanty et al.(2009), “When a child reads and writes in mother tongue, she understands the relationship between spoken and written language and this understanding facilitates learning to read and write in another language”. Concepts and information understood once in the mother tongue need not be learnt or understood again in another language; only some new words or labels for the concepts need to be learnt.”(pp. 2) 

For example, once students understand and learn the different function of different body parts, they need to understand the concepts and labels in a new language rather than learning the same thing again.
“Mohanty et al. (2009) point out that: …beginning from their knowledge of the mother tongue, children develop higher levels of language skills in school. Development of knowledge and language always moves from simple to complex levels. However, education in a language other than the mother tongue hinders such progress and children cannot develop the ability for complex intellectual thinking with language.” (pp. 2)
“A multilingual pedagogy facilitates both comprehension and a more sensitive entry into newer languages, experiences and concepts” (Nag, 2019, pp.34) Thus, a multilingual as a classroom resource would facilitate the child’s learning of other languages.


**Enhances democracy -** A multilingual classroom in which teacher uses the different kind of languages while an activity or teaching a lesson would ensure a democratic space for all as (Nag,2019) states that, “It helps in the creation of more democratic classrooms where no experience is silenced in the absence of a language to voice it and that redefines the power structure between the teacher and the student.”(p.34)\
Rege (2016) draw our attention towards the connection between culture, knowledge and power. She highlights the epistemic value of knowledge embedded in languages that help us understand the power relation that exist between the languages of different caste, class and gender locations of society. Inculcating all the languages of students in a classroom would make sure that each’s voice and culture is adhered to, given attention and would largely sensitize other children towards their culture and knowledge systems thus enforcing a democratic environment. 
Agnihotri(1995) states that, “Most of our knowledge is acquired through language and that language structure encodes social differentiation and exploitation in a variety of ways, language, very subtly, also structures our thoughts and delimits our articulations.”(pp.3).

How multilingualism can be a pedagogical resource - According to Agnihotri (1995) , children in multilingual societies learn several languages because the focus is not on language learning but on the messages contained in the languages. In a classroom situation for this to happen, the focus of learning process should be on meaningful tasks and peer group interaction.. There needs to be an interaction of the literary discourse with the social and historical worlds of that language/material that is being taught. Children, parents and teachers can produce their own local learning materials. Such materials would be aimed at creating a critical awareness among students so that they are able to read and articulate their experiences in one’s own and different languages. The teacher training modules should include “Comparative grammar, theories of language learning, critical reading of texts of all kinds, role play, intertextual reading, development of writing systems and relationship between speech and writing , translation and the analysis of translation process, etc.”(Agnihotri, 1995,pp.7). Bhattacharya (2017) suggests towards a teacher exploring the meanings of different words used in books/concepts to understand and reflect upon the geography, people, individual experiences, histories, language-literature that a child has derived or understands according to his/her community. This could be another way of how multilingualism can be used in pedagogy.