---
title: Notion of 'compassionate intervention', problems associated with it in
  the era of globalization and export of childhood
date: 2020-05-12T05:27:42.290Z
autoThumbnailImage: false
thumbnailImagePosition: top
coverImage: /images/uploads/cover-post.jpg
---
The modern image of childhood is considered as innocent and as being someone who gets a playful and caring environment. We tend to fix this notion of childhood to whenever we encounter a suffering child. This suffering can be from various reasons such as poverty, less parental care, undernutrition, unavailability of resources, etc.  

Oishik Sircar and Debolina Dutta (2011) point towards the problem of images of suffering of child that are used to collect funds by different institutions. The pitiful and cute images have become a strategy for gaining compassion from the audience. It is this notion of ‘compassionate intervention’ that the article brings to focus. Though in today’s world the compassion or pitiness arouses in a natural sense when we speak or represent the images of women and elderly but it’s the children who compel us for a rational commitment to help them. We tend to do so because we have been preconceived with the notion of childhood as described above. Rather than focusing on the causes that are responsible for suffering and reducing or trying to fix them, we sentimentalize the suffering. Moreover, our compassionate responses become fix on only certain kind of remedies. As Sircar and Dutta write, we try to 'restore' and 'rescue' the innocence by methods such as providing the children with education or lifting them out from their surroundings.


‘Born into Brothels’, a film directed by Ross Kauffman and Zana Briski in which Briski, visits India, she decides to offer photography workshops to eight children of sex workers in Kolkata’s Sonagachi red light district area. It shows how Zana Briski entered the space of the eight children of sex workers and tried to rehabilitate the children and rescue them through removal and relocation. This is termed as ‘compassionate intervention’. She taught them photography and has done quite appreciable work, but at the end of the film, she also resorts to labelling the photos by children as photos by a child of sex worker. Also, the name of the film is Born into Brothels itself suggests that children are born into a brothel and hence a preconception exists in the mind of everyone whoever reads the title that children born in a place of prostitution would become sex workers only when they grow up. The problem of compassionate intervention is this only. Though Zara wanted to help the children and understand their lives, she is also almost under the grab of globalisation in such a way that she chooses to represent the pictures at the exhibition. If she was that much concerned about the children, then she would have done something related to the three counter R's (resilience, reworking, resistance) that are suggested by Sircar and Dutta. The three R's that are usually used to counter any situation are of Raid, Rescue and Rehabilitation. Raid refers to entry of someone else into a place to find something or someone. We can perceive entry of Zana Briski into the community of sex workers of Kolkata’s Sonagachi red light district as a raid. Rescue means to help someone in coming out from a difficult situation. The idea of getting the children admitted into schools is an act of rescuing them from their situation. Rehabilitation means restoring someone to normal life after due training.  The practice of Zana to teach the children photography can be considered as a rehabilitation mechanism because it led the children to forget (though for a small period) about the lives of their families and the clumsy situations they were living in. The children could even start earning themselves using photography. All these strategies used by Zana helped the children for a short while and we can’t be sure that how much did it affect their lives in a positive manner. As Boyden also writes that the measures such as rehabilitation are effective in many cases. Children used to freedom of streets do not normally adapt well to life in an instiy and may eventually escape. 


The another strategy is counter R's are resilience, resistance and reworking are an instance of humanitarian based to rights based approaches. The three R's and counter R's can be equated to politics of pity and politics of solidarity respectively. Resilience means capacity to recover quickly from difficulties. Reworking means refusal to accept something wrong. Resistance means protest. Resilience by children is practiced through tacit negotiations between transgression and conformity. At the end of the film it’s told that Tapasi ran away from home and went to school. This can be an example of both reworking and resistance. We also see sections in the film in which children speak about their ambitions which shows that they are well aware of the community in which they are living and want to make a progress in their lives. 


In a globalised world, different competencies are perceived to be associated with childhood in different societies. The manner in which transition to adulthood varies from one country to next. Hence, there is a need to recognise multiple and diverse childhoids. Also, there needs to be focus on preventive elements along with correctional elements in welfare provisions.

References –  

Sircar,O. & Dutta. D.(2011). Beyond Compassion: Children of Sex workers in Kolkata’s Sonagachi. Childhoods, 18(3), 333-349.

Bowden, Jo. (1997). "Childhood and the Policy Makers: A comparative perspective on the globalization of childhood" In James, A & Prout A. (Eds)Constructing and Reconstructing Childhood Contemporary Issues in the Sociological Study of Childhood (Second Edition) London Falmer Press 290-214 

Stearns, Peter. (2012) "Globalization and Childhood in Heidi Morrison (ed) The Global History of Childhood Reader. NY Routledge. Pp 235-243